In this lesson we will learn about the cascade.
The first letter in CSSA stands for cascading.
So let's spend a few minutes to understand what the word means in this context.
A dictionary will tell us that a cascade is a small waterfall.
Typically one of several that fall in stages down a slope.
So this is excellent.
We can use the waterfall as a metaphor to understand the cascade that takes place in the web browser
.
Let's think of water in this example as stylistic instructions for the web browser.
Now we know that by default without CSSA web pages look very boring and they look very plain.
All of the text is black.
Everything looks very uniform and there's not much of a creative layout.
However even without any CSSA it's not as if our waterfall is completely void of water.
There's still a little bit of styling going on.
The first tiny bit of water that is layered onto the waterfall is known as browser defaults.
So for example by default web browsers will render heading level 1 elements in a larger font size than
standard paragraph text.
So this default stylistic preference of the web browser is the first tiny stream of water that makes
the waterfall but then we as web developers can come in with our CSSA we can come in with our own style
sheets and override that preference with a new layer of water or a new stream of water so we can simply
edit a CSSA file in our text editor target the heading level one element and say you know what instead
of being HUGE your font size should only be a little bit larger than regular text and you shouldn't
be bold either.
You should just use a standard or normal font weight.
I think that looks much better.
So that's the first component of understanding the cascade.
It's this idea that the web browser has defaults and we can override those defaults.
The next step in understanding how the cascade works is unraveling a concept known as inheritance inheritance
is the way that certain CSSA properties are passed along from ancestor elements to children elements
.
So if you think of the Russian stacking doll analogy inheritance is what allows certain stylistic traits
to be passed along to children.
So for example we know that in our HTL structure that the body element houses or contains all of the
pages content.
So let's imagine that we wanted our entire page to use green text instead of selecting individual elements
.
We can simply write CSSA that selects the body element and the color of green will be inherited by all
children elements.
So if I refresh we can see the entire page uses green text.
So if we think of the waterfall analogy by default the web browser said all text should be black.
Then our CSSA came in and said no it should be green.
Now just as we overrode the browser default we can override our own default so to speak.
So we said that all text should be green and that cascaded down to all children elements.
But it's very easy to override that preference if we get a bit more specific.
So let's say that we want the footer text in our website to be orange in our CSSA file.
We simply select the footer color orange
so we can see how simple it is to create stylistic preferences that cascade to multiple elements on
the page.
And then when we need to scale back we can simply override that preference for a particular area.
Now I will point out that not every single siestas property can be inherited.
So for example color can be inherited.
Now there's no sense in this moment memorizing which properties can be inherited and which cannot.
You will learn that information throughout the remainder of this course as it becomes necessary now
for the time being there's one final topic that I want to cover in this lesson so we've covered cascading
.
We've covered inheritance.
Now I want to talk a little bit about specificity specificity is how the web browser decides which set
of CSSA instructions to listen to.
If two or more styles are competing with one another.
So for example let's imagine that instead of selecting body to make all the text green let's imagine
that we selected all of the paragraph elements on the page.
If I refresh we can see that the heading level one is black by DiVall but our new rule is selecting
only paragraphs.
Now if we wanted our footer text to be orange
footer color orange this will not work.
So if I were fresh you can see that nothing changes this footer text is still green.
So earlier we learned that overriding an inherited value is very simple but overriding a value that
has been explicitly set on an element is a bit trickier.
So because this selector is actively targeting the paragraph elements on the page we cannot rely on
footer to trickle down the inheritance of orange to its children.
Instead we need to directly compete with and beat this rule.
So instead of footer we'll say foot or space.
P.
Now this rule or this selector is more specific than this selector.
So this selector will win.
So if I save and refresh we can see those two paragraphs are orange.
Now this is an excellent example of specificity.
So in this case it's clear common sense tells us that this rule is more specific.
However specificity is a very complex topic because it's not always so clear what the web browser will
consider more specific.
Now instead of having a 30 minute lesson just on specificity we will instead learn about it in chunks
or in waves.
So as your understanding of CSS as a whole continues to develop.
So will your understanding of specificity.
Now for this first wave of specificity knowledge all I want you to keep in mind are these few following
rules of thumb.
Number one descendant selectors are more specific than type selectors.
We already saw an example of this Footner P is more specific than P because he selects all paragraphs
on the entire page whereas footer.
Only select paragraphs within a certain section of the page.
Number two deeply nested descendant selectors are more specific than shallow or simple descendant selectors
.
So for example if I wanted to override this rule I could simply say body Forder P.
Now I'm not saying that this is considered a best practice or that this is an example of squeaky clean
success but that this is more specific than this selector.
So now we could say color red we can see that that change is being obeyed.
Number three class selectors are more specific then type or descendant selectors.
So for example if we wanted to override this rule we can simply see that this paragraph has a class
of highlight.
So all we need to do is type period.
And then the name of the class highlight color purple.
And that will be obeyed.
Number four a descendant selector which references a class is more specific than a solitary class selector
.
So all that means is if we wanted to override this rule we could say within the footer element find
elements that have a class of highlight give them a color of blue.
So if we save and refresh we can see that that paragraph is now blue.
And finally number five when two rules have identical specificity values whichever one comes last in
the style she will be followed.
So let me show you a really quick example.
The color blue the color red.
So obviously these two have the same specificity values we save and refresh can see that red is taking
precedence.
But if we moved blue to sit below this rule then obviously it takes precedence.
Now the reason I bring this up is because the ordering of your style sheet most definitely matters.
We will learn in later lessons that it's considered best practice to start with your more generic rules
and then as you work your way down your style sheet include more and more specific rules that's going
to conclude this lesson.
We've learned quite a bit so let's review.
We learned why the word cascading is used to describe style sheets we learned about inheritance and
we learned about specificity.
Now this is the most technical CSSA lesson in the course.
These are the basic principles that allow us to stay organized in our style sheets to have everything
in this lesson wasn't crystal clear that's OK.
These are concepts that we're going to be relearning and revisiting throughout the course.
The main point is that I want you to be familiar with the terms inheritance and specificity your understanding
of those will continue to grow.
So I'll see you in the next lesson